Yes. Since you’re new to ADF, I would not start with the “read Excel directly from SharePoint into SQL” pattern. Microsoft’s SharePoint Online connector is primarily for lists, not files, and the file pattern uses a Web activity to get a token plus a Copy activity with HTTP source. Also, ADF’s Excel parser is supported for HTTP / Blob / ADLS / file-based connectors and reads Excel only as a source, not a sink. For a first implementation, the cleanest design is:

SharePoint file → Blob/ADLS landing → Excel parse → SQL staging → stored proc / merge.

Step 2, fully fleshed out
0) Before you touch ADF

Have these ready first:

an Azure subscription
an Azure Data Factory resource
either Azure Blob Storage or ADLS Gen2 for the landing file
your SQL Server target table or at least a staging table design
access to the SharePoint site where the workbook lives
a Windows machine that can reach your SQL Server, because if SQL Server is on-prem or otherwise network-restricted, ADF needs a self-hosted integration runtime for that connection.
1) Create the Data Factory

In Azure Portal:

Search for Data Factory
Click Create
Choose subscription, resource group, region, and a factory name
After deployment, click Launch Studio

That gets you into the ADF UI where you’ll build the pipeline. Microsoft’s copy workflow in ADF is built around:

linked services
datasets
pipeline activities.
2) Create your Integration Runtime(s)

This is the part most beginners miss.

Azure IR

You already get an Azure Integration Runtime by default. Use that for cloud-accessible pieces like SharePoint token/web calls and Azure storage.

Self-hosted IR

If your SQL Server is on-prem, behind firewall, or otherwise not publicly reachable, create a self-hosted IR:

In ADF Studio:

Manage
Integration runtimes
+ New
Choose Self-hosted
Name it
Download and install the runtime on a Windows server or VM that can reach SQL Server
Register it with the key ADF gives you

Microsoft’s docs are explicit that when copying to or from on-prem or network-restricted data stores, you need a self-hosted IR. Also, if one side of a Copy activity uses a self-hosted IR, that activity’s source and sink both need to be reachable from the machine hosting that IR.

Practical advice: install the self-hosted IR on a server that:

is always on
has stable network
can reach SQL Server
can also reach Azure storage over HTTPS

That keeps the second copy step simple.

3) Create the SharePoint app registration

To get files out of SharePoint Online in ADF, Microsoft’s documented pattern is:

register an app in Microsoft Entra ID
grant that app permission to the SharePoint site
use a Web activity to request an access token
pass that token to a Copy activity that uses HTTP as the source.

From the SharePoint connector doc, you need:

Application (client) ID
Application key or certificate
Tenant ID
permission granted on the SharePoint site.

In practice, your Microsoft 365 / SharePoint admin may need to help with this part.

4) Create linked services

Now go to Manage → Linked services → New and create these.

A. Azure Storage linked service

Create a linked service for either:

Azure Blob Storage
or ADLS Gen2

This is where the workbook file will land first. ADF Copy activity supports file-based copy between stores, and Excel parsing is supported from Blob/ADLS.

B. SQL Server linked service

Create a linked service for SQL Server:

server name
database
auth method
select your self-hosted IR if SQL Server is not publicly accessible

Test connection before saving. If this test fails, stop there and fix network/auth before building anything else. The pipeline will not magically solve a bad linked service. The need for self-hosted IR in on-prem/network-restricted scenarios is part of the Copy activity model.

C. HTTP linked service

Create an HTTP linked service pointing at the SharePoint file endpoint pattern you’ll use for the file copy. This works because ADF supports Excel parsing over HTTP, and the SharePoint file-copy pattern specifically uses HTTP as the source after obtaining a token.

5) Build datasets

Datasets are pointers to actual source/sink objects.

You’ll want at least these:

Dataset 1: Landing binary file in Blob/ADLS

This represents the raw workbook after you copy it from SharePoint into Azure storage.

Use a file-based dataset in your storage account, usually parameterized with:

folder path
file name
Dataset 2: Excel dataset over the landed workbook

Create an Excel dataset against the Blob/ADLS file.
Set:

file location = the landed .xlsx
sheetName or sheetIndex
firstRowAsHeader = true if your top row is headers

Microsoft’s Excel format doc says Excel datasets support:

.xls and .xlsx
sheetName or sheetIndex
optional range
firstRowAsHeader
and Excel is source-only, not sink.
Dataset 3: SQL staging table

Create an SQL dataset for something like:

dbo.stg_sharepoint_excel_import

I strongly recommend a staging table first, not writing straight into your final table.

6) Create the pipeline

Go to Author → + → Pipeline.

Name it something like:
pl_sharepoint_excel_to_sql

Then add these activities in order.

7) Activity 1: Web activity to get SharePoint token

Add a Web activity named Get_SPO_Token.

Microsoft’s SharePoint file-copy doc shows this pattern:

URL:
https://accounts.accesscontrol.windows.net/[Tenant-ID]/tokens/OAuth/2
Method: POST
Header:
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Body with grant_type, client_id, client_secret, resource, and tenant values.

This activity returns a token in the output JSON. You’ll reference that token in the next Copy activity.

Important: save the app secret in Azure Key Vault if possible rather than hardcoding it. The SharePoint linked-service doc explicitly supports secret storage in Key Vault for credentials.

8) Activity 2: Copy workbook file from SharePoint to Blob/ADLS

Add a Copy data activity named Copy_SharePoint_File_To_Landing.

This is still copying the workbook as a file, not parsing Excel yet.

Configure it like this:

Source: HTTP-based file source, authenticated with the bearer token from the Web activity
Sink: Blob/ADLS file path like:
raw/sharepoint/yourfile.xlsx

Why do this first?
Because it separates:

SharePoint authentication/file retrieval
Excel parsing
SQL loading

That makes debugging much easier. ADF can copy files as-is between file-based stores without serialization/deserialization when doing straight file movement.

9) Activity 3: Copy Excel sheet into SQL staging

Add another Copy data activity named Copy_Excel_To_SQL_Staging.

Configure it like this:

Source

Use the Excel dataset you created on the landed file.
Set:

sheet name
first row as header
optional range if you do not want the entire sheet

Microsoft’s Excel doc says if no range is specified, ADF reads the worksheet as a table from the first non-empty row/column.

Sink

Use your SQL staging dataset.

For the first build, choose a very simple staging table with permissive column types, for example:

varchar(...) for text-ish fields
decimal(...) for numeric columns you trust
datetime only if Excel dates are truly clean

ADF can do column mapping during Copy activity, but Excel type weirdness is common. Microsoft also notes the Excel connector loads the whole file into memory and can time out on large files, especially over HTTP during preview/schema import.

My advice: keep your workbook modest and your sheet clean:

no merged cells
no fancy title rows
no totals row above headers
one tabular block only
10) Activity 4: Stored procedure to merge into final table

After the staging load succeeds, add either:

a Stored Procedure activity
or a Script activity

Use it to:

validate row counts
dedupe
trim/cast columns
MERGE or INSERT/UPDATE into final table

That fits ADF’s intended pattern: Copy activity moves data, and then other activities handle transformation or downstream logic.

A typical flow is:

TRUNCATE TABLE dbo.stg_sharepoint_excel_import;

-- ADF load happens here

EXEC dbo.usp_merge_sharepoint_excel_import;
11) Add trigger

Once manual runs work, add a trigger.

Go to Add Trigger → New/Edit and choose one of these:

Scheduled trigger

Best first version. Example:

every day at 6:00 AM
Event-driven

Possible, but for your first ADF pipeline I would skip it. Scheduled is simpler and easier to troubleshoot.

12) Monitor runs

Use Monitor in ADF Studio.

Microsoft’s Copy activity docs say ADF gives visual monitoring and performance stats for copy runs. When something fails, check which activity failed:

token activity
SharePoint file copy
Excel parse
SQL write

For your first build, test in this order:

run Get_SPO_Token
verify the workbook lands in Blob/ADLS
preview the Excel dataset
load 5–20 rows into SQL staging
then run full size
What I would do in your shoes

Build version 1 like this:

SharePoint workbook copied to Blob as-is
One specific sheet loaded to dbo.stg_xxx
Stored proc merges into final table
Daily scheduled trigger

That is the easiest version to get working and the easiest version to support.

The main gotchas

The biggest traps are:

SharePoint app permissions not actually granted
self-hosted IR installed on the wrong machine
SQL Server reachable from your laptop but not from the IR machine
ugly Excel sheet structure
trying to skip staging and go straight into production tables
Honest take

ADF can absolutely do this, but SharePoint file auth is the annoying part, not the SQL load. Once the file is landing in Blob/ADLS, the rest is straightforward.

I can lay out the exact objects next: which linked services, datasets, activities, and expressions to create, with example names and values.